Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are talking about time perception.
Our perception of time is perhaps the most important factor
in how we gauge our life.
That is, whether or not we think we are being successful,
whether or not we are failing,
whether or not we live in fear,
whether or not we live in relation to things
in a way that's positive.
And the reason for that is that our perception of time
is directly linked to the neurochemical states
that control mood, stress, happiness, excitement,
and of course, it frames the way
in which we evaluate our past.
So whether or not we think of our past
as successful or unsuccessful, it frames our present,
whether or not we think we are on track or off track,
and it frames our sense of the future,
whether or not we think we have a bright future,
a dim future, or whether or not the future
is very uncertain or not.
Today, we are going to talk about
the science of time perception,
and we are going to talk about tools and protocols
that you can use that can enhance your ability
to dilate and contract time.
What do we mean by dilate and contract time?
We can control the speed at which we experience life.
We can slow things down or we can speed
our experience of life up,
and we can do that in a very direct and dynamic way.
It's actually not that hard
once you understand how time perception works.
So that's where we're headed.
I think you're going to come away from today's episode
with a lot of new knowledge and certainly with many tools
that you can try in your daily life,
whether or not that's work, sport, relational,
emotional, and so on.
Before we begin our discussion about time perception,
I'd like to answer some questions that I received
related to the episode on fasting
and time-restricted feeding.
If you haven't seen that episode,
this information should still be of use to you.
Time-restricted feeding involves eating
for a particular period of time in each 24-hour cycle
that's fairly regular.
So this would be an eight-hour most often
or a 10-hour block.
Some people do shorter feeding windows,
but regardless, that feeding window is supposed to fall
at more or less the same period within each 24-hour day.
This has a number of positive effects on gene expression
that regulate a number of positive effects
on the different tissues of the body.
And for some people, not all,
but for some people makes weight loss easier
because of the way that they are not eating
for large periods of each 24-hour cycle.
In any event, one of the major questions I got
after that episode was do supplements break a fast?
And during that episode,
I talked about what breaks a fast is highly contextual.
It basically boils down to whether or not
something you ingest, whether it be liquid or food,
increases your resting blood glucose,
how much it increases that resting blood glucose,
and how long that increase lasts.
So you can check out the episode
for more about what breaks a fast,
but to address this issue about supplements
and whether or not supplements a particular break a fast,
many of the questions were about Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is a sponsor of this podcast.
It is also a terrific supplement that I had been taking
for more than a decade before this podcast launched.
And many people have been using
and continue to use Athletic Greens.
Does Athletic Greens break a fast?
Well, that will somewhat depend on whether or not
your resting blood glucose tends to run high or low.
But for most people, including me,
because I've measured it,
ingesting Athletic Greens does not break a fast.
And if it happens to break a fast,
it would be a very transient break in fast.
So without knowing your resting blood glucose levels
on an individual basis,
there's no way I can say for sure
that it doesn't break a fast,
but chances are it does not
because it doesn't contain much carbohydrate or sugar,
and it doesn't tend to therefore pull you out
of the molecular milieu
associated with low blood glucose states.
The other question I get is whether or not
things like fish oil break a fast.
And once again, this will be contextual,
but because fish oil is a fat,
mainly essential fatty acids, in particular EPA and DHA,
those don't tend to raise blood glucose very much.
In my case, having measured,
using a continuous glucose monitor,
my resting blood glucose, fish oil,
does not in any way change my resting blood glucose.
Chances are it won't do that for most people as well.
So does fish oil break a fast?
Chances are it does not.
And of course, people wanted to know
about pill type supplements,
caffeine and things that raise dopamine
and their vitamins and minerals.
In general, if something doesn't contain sugar
or much carbohydrate of any kind,
it's not going to raise blood glucose very much.
Now, of course, protein can raise blood glucose
and fat can too as well, although to a lesser extent.
So again, this is all contextual,
but at least by the logic that I just spelled out,
athletic greens, fish oil, and most forms of supplements,
provided they don't have any sugar or protein content,
should not quote unquote break a fast.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system.
And one of the key things about our visual system
is that it's designed so that when you move into areas
where it's sunny or where there are shadows,
you can still see things with crystal clarity.
Many sunglasses out there have the problem
that you have to keep taking them off
and putting them back on depending on the overall
so-called ambient environment that you're in.
Roca sunglasses have solved this problem.
And their eyeglasses also have superb clarity
regardless of overall ambient lighting, as we say.
In other words, you see everything very clearly
no matter where you are.
They also come in a number of different styles.
The aesthetics are really terrific.
So unlike a lot of performance glasses out there
that make people look like cyborgs,
you can wear them anywhere.
You can wear them to dinner,
you can wear them to school or work or in social engagements,
and you can wear them running and cycling
and out doing your various activities.
If you'd like to try Roca glasses,
you can go to Roca, that's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral
probiotic drink.
I started using Athletic Greens way back in 2012,
and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started using Athletic Greens
and the reason I still take Athletic Greens
once or twice every day is that it covers
all of my foundational needs for vitamins,
minerals, and probiotics.
In fact, when people ask me what supplements
they should take, if I were going to recommend
just one supplement, it would be Athletic Greens
because of the enormous number of biological factors
that it impacts in a positive way.
As I mentioned, vitamins and minerals,
the probiotics are really important
for the gut microbiome and gut health,
which is important for the immune system
and for brain health and for mood
and a number of other important factors,
including hormones and so on.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim their special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road or in the car,
and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Vitamin D3 and K2 have been shown to be really important
for a number of important aspects
of your immediate and long-term health,
including blood lipid profiles and a number of other things.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs,
and the year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed from a quality blood test.
And it's for that reason that I get my blood work done
once every four to six months.
Might seem like a lot, but it has been vital
in order to keep my health where I want it
and to ensure that my health trajectory
is heading in the direction that I'd like it to go
with each passing year.
The other thing about Inside Tracker is they have DNA tests
which can tell you about the specific makeup of your genes
that can impact your particular nutrition, lifestyle,
and supplementation regimes that can also help you
steer your immediate and long-term health
in the direction that you want to go.
They make the whole thing very, very easy.
You can have the blood test taken at home,
or you can go to a local clinic.
Then the results come back.
And the wonderful thing is the platform,
the dashboard that they use, walks you through your data
and points to specific things related to nutrition.
Maybe you should be eating more of certain things,
eating less of others,
supplementing in certain ways or not,
and lifestyle factors like exercise
in order to bring the numbers into the ranges
that are right for your immediate and long-term health.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
So let's talk about time perception.
And the most fundamental aspect of time perception
is something called entrainment.
Entrainment is the way in which your internal processes,
your biology and your psychology,
are linked to some external thing.
And the most basic form of entrainment
that we are all a slave to all year round
for our entire life are so-called circannual rhythms.
We have neurons, nerve cells in our eye, in our brain,
and in our body that are marking off
the passage of time throughout the year,
literally a calendar system in your brain and body.
And the way this works is beautifully simple.
Light seen by your eyes inhibits,
meaning it reduces the amount of a hormone
released in your brain called melatonin.
Melatonin has two major functions.
One function is to make you sleepy at night,
and the other is to regulate some of the other hormones
of the body, in particular, testosterone and estrogen.
When we view light,
we reduce the amount of melatonin released.
In fact, if you wake up in the middle of the night
when melatonin typically is pretty high
in your brain and body,
and you flip on a bright light in the bathroom,
your melatonin levels crash down to almost zero
and stay there.
Light is a very powerful modulator of melatonin,
and light inhibits melatonin.
Throughout the year, depending on where you live,
day length varies, and as a consequence,
the amount of light from the sun
that is available to you varies.
So when days are long,
the amount of melatonin in your brain and body
that's released tends to be less.
There's less of it,
and it's released for shorter amounts of time, okay?
Because light inhibits melatonin.
When days are very short,
the amount of melatonin that's released
and the duration that that melatonin exists
in your brain and body tends to be much longer.
So melatonin correlates with day length,
and if we are viewing more light,
we have less melatonin, we view less light,
we have more melatonin.
You see different amounts of light each day,
but we have a process in our brain and body
that averages the amount of light that you're seeing,
both from artificial sources and from sunlight,
and measures that off, and it's so exquisitely precise
that for a given, say, eight-hour day in the spring,
because spring in the Northern Hemisphere or elsewhere,
days are getting longer,
that means that the amount of melatonin
is getting progressively less and less,
and that signal is conveyed to all the systems
of your brain and body, and this is why most people,
not all, but most people,
feel like they have more energy in the spring.
Conversely, when you have an eight-hour day in the winter,
the amount of melatonin that corresponds
to that eight-hour day
is getting progressively greater and greater,
because why?
Days are getting shorter,
so melatonin is increasing from day to day to day.
Every cell and system of your body pays attention to this,
and as a consequence, most people, not all,
but most people feel they have a little less
or sometimes a lot less energy
and a slightly lower mood in the winter months.
Now, there are exceptions to this, of course,
but the melatonin signal is the way
in which your internal state, your mood,
your sense of energy, even your appetite,
is entrained, is matched to some external event.
In this case, the event is the rotation
of the Earth around the sun.
There are other forms of entrainment,
meaning the matching of your brain and body
to things that are happening in your external environment.
One particularly interesting example of this
was published last year by Perik et al. in Cell Report,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal,
showing that across the calendar year,
the amount of testosterone and estrogen
that human beings make varies,
such that in longer days,
they tend to make more testosterone and estrogen
than in shorter days,
and this was correlated with things like
desire to seek out romantic partners
or have romantic interactions with their existing partners,
even aggression, although not violent aggression,
but sense of kind of willingness to argue
and to get into kind of combative states
and overall energy and mood.
This is something that had been hypothesized
for a long time, but it had never really
been cleanly demonstrated,
and what they showed was that it's actually the skin
that's taking information about the amount of light
and converting it into these increases
in testosterone and estrogen.
Light exposure to the skin turns out about two hours a day.
This was sunlight, in this case, to the upper body.
These people weren't naked.
They were wearing clothes, but their arms were exposed.
Their upper back and neck and face were exposed.
They were not wearing hats.
Resulted in large increases,
significant increases in testosterone and estrogen.
Now, you could probably export a tool from that
if you liked.
That's not really what this podcast is about,
but it's very clear that because the skin is acting
as an endocrine organ, excuse me,
as kind of a hormone influencing organ,
that getting light on the skin, not just to the eyes,
can influence our sense of wellbeing
by these hormone pathways.
And the threshold there, again,
seemed to be about two hours a day.
It doesn't have to be very bright outside.
There can be cloud cover and so on.
Many people will probably ask,
will sunscreen inhibit this effect?
And it doesn't appear that it does.
Obviously, prioritize skin health and avoiding skin cancer.
Sunscreen is kind of a controversial topic nowadays.
Maybe the topic for another podcast episode at some point.
But nonetheless, what the Perik et al study shows,
and that's most relevant to today's podcast,
is that we are entrained,
we are matched to the external light-dark cycle.
And as the day length changes, our hormones change.
And we can override that with exposure to bright lights.
You know, people go sit on tanning beds.
It's not a practice I particularly myself engage in,
but you know, there are a number of different ways
that people can override these processes.
But the point is very simple.
The point is that our perception of time is both conscious,
you know, it's waiting, watching the clock tick down,
and there are these slower, what we call oscillatory,
meaning up and down, repeatedly slower oscillatory events
related to day length that are influencing our hormones,
like melatonin, testosterone, and estrogen,
and therefore our mood, our outlook,
and even our behavior.
The next level of time, or bin of time, as we say,
that we are all entrained or matched to
is the so-called circadian time cycle,
which is 24-hour rhythm.
This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm that we all contain
and that none of us can escape from.
We all have this circadian clock
that resides over the roof of our mouth,
the cells in that circadian clock fire,
meaning they release chemicals into our brain and body
on a very regular rhythm.
So across the 24-hour cycle,
they will be very active at some periods
and less active at others.
Not surprisingly, there are periods of every 24-hour cycle
when we are very active and we tend to be alert,
and others when we are asleep.
Now, I've talked a lot about circadian rhythms and sleep
on this podcast previously,
and so I don't want to repeat too much of that information
in detail, but I'm just going to give a summary
of how circadian entrainment works
because I haven't really covered that
in the context of time perception.
We have this circadian clock.
It oscillates.
It goes up and down once every 24 hours and then repeats.
Every cell of our body has a 24-hour oscillation
in the expression of various genes.
How that works is actually really simple,
elegant, and interesting.
DNA genes make RNA.
RNA is converted into proteins.
Every cell in our body has this beautiful 24-hour timer
where a gene is expressed,
and the important thing to understand about a given gene
in this context is that that gene is inhibited,
meaning it's reduced by a particular protein,
by a little biological molecule in that cell.
So the gene gets expressed when there's very little
of that other molecule around.
DNA then becomes RNA.
RNA is translated into a protein,
and that protein goes way, way up, and the gene shuts down,
but as that protein gets used up
and its levels eventually drop low, low, low, low, low
to zero, the gene cycle kicks in again,
and the gene gets expressed.
The RNA gets expressed in the protein again.
This all happens on a 24-hour cycle,
so it's a little built-in timer in each and every one
of our cells, and I didn't list off the genes,
but for the aficionados out there,
they go by names like per, for period, bmal, clock,
and all these different things.
We call them the clock genes,
and those clock genes regulate
a number of different functions.
So every cell in our body has a 24-hour cycle
of gene and protein expression,
and the earth rotates once every 24 hours,
and the processes that are happening
in every cell of our body are linked.
They are entrained, as we say,
to the outside light-dark cycle because morning sunlight,
evening sunlight, and the lack of light
in the middle of the night make sure that the changes,
these oscillations that are occurring within the cells
of our brain and body are matched
to the outside light-dark cycle.
And I want to go into all the details of how that happens,
but there's some very simple tools that one can use
to ensure that your entrainment,
your circadian entrainment is precise.
And I cannot emphasize enough how important it is
that your circadian entrainment be precise.
Why?
Because disruptions in circadian entrainment
cause huge health problems.
They increase cancer risk.
They increase obesity.
They increase mental health issues.
They decrease wound healing.
They decrease physical and mental performance.
They disrupt hormones.
You want your cells to be linked to the circadian cycle
that's outside you.
And the circadian cycle outside you mainly consists
of when there's sunlight and when there is not.
And that's why the simple protocols to fall out
of this whole discussion about circadian entrainment
are the following.
View 10 to 30 minutes of bright light, ideally sunlight,
within an hour of waking,
assuming that you're waking early in the day,
especially you wake up early in the day,
get outside, see sunlight.
Do that again in the afternoon or around evening,
10 to 30 minutes, depending on how bright it is outside.
Artificial lights throughout the day,
or if you want to be awake and you wake up early
and there's no sunlight outside,
you can of course turn on artificial lights
if you want to be awake.
But basically you want as much bright light,
ideally from sunlight, coming in through your eyes
throughout the day.
And then in the evening,
you want as little bright light coming in
through your eyes.
I've said this over and over and over again on this podcast.
There's always a lot of negotiations,
but I want to make a few things clear.
Try not to wear sunglasses if you can do it safely.
Find to wear eyeglasses or contacts.
That's not going to be a problem.
The light viewing that you do
and the avoidance of light at night,
set the fundamental layer of your time perception.
One of the best ways to disrupt your perception of time
in the ways that we're going to talk about
in the subsequent portions of the podcast
is to disrupt your circadian clock.
And that is not a good thing
for a number of different reasons.
There are other ways to so-called
entrain your circadian clock.
One of the best ways to do that
is to engage in physical activity
at fairly regular times of day.
You don't have to do it every day,
but if you're going to exercise,
try and exercise at a fairly consistent time of day.
Probably better to exercise than to not exercise,
even if you have to move that time of day.
But light, activity,
and we'll talk about the third in a minute, food,
are the major ways that you entrain
your internal perception of time
to the external events of the world,
meaning that the turning of the earth
and therefore the exposure to sunlight or not.
So in addition to the sunlight viewing
in the morning and throughout the day
and avoiding bright light at night of any kind,
not just blue light,
trying to get your activity,
your exercise at fairly regular
within plus or minus two hours from each day to the next
is going to have a very positive effect
on so-called circadian entrainment.
And also eating at fairly regular times.
However, this is exciting.
The data mainly point to the fact
that you need to eat
within more or less the same time window each day,
not that you always need to eat your meals
at exactly the same time.
So you don't necessarily have to eat lunch at noon
and a snack at four and dinner at eight
in order to keep your circadian entrainment
aligned or sharp.
You could, for instance, have a small snack at noon
and then eat at two and then have dinner at six
and then a small snack at eight.
It doesn't so much matter when the exact meals fall
so much as that they fall more or less
within a consistent period or phase of each 24 hour cycle.
What happens when this circadian clock
starts getting disrupted?
I mean, this is after all an episode about time perception.
It's not an episode about circadian rhythms and entrainment.
Well, there's a classic study by Ashoff done in 1985
that's now been repeated many times
where they had people go into environments
where they didn't have clocks and they didn't have windows
and they didn't have watches.
And they were sometimes even in constant dark
or constant light.
And they evaluated how well people perceive
the passage of time on shorter timescales.
And what they found was really interesting.
What they found is that people underestimate
how long they were in these isolated environments.
So after 42 days or so, they'd ask people,
how long do you think you've been in here?
And people would say 28 days or 36 days.
They generally underestimated how long they had been
in this very odd environment with no clocks or watches
or exposure to sunlight or regular rhythms
of artificial light.
In addition, they found that their perception
of shorter time intervals was also really disrupted.
So if they asked them to measure off two minutes,
normally people are pretty good
at measuring off two minutes.
People come within five to 15 seconds at most.
If you kind of had to sit there and just wait,
you have a pretty good idea of when two minutes is up,
you say two minutes is up.
Well, when people's circadian clocks
or circadian entrainment, I should say, was disrupted,
their perception of time measurement on shorter timescales
of minutes or even seconds was greatly disrupted.
And as we'll see in a couple of minutes,
that actually causes great problems
for how you contend with work,
how you contend with challenges of different kinds.
You want your circadian entrainment to be pretty locked in
or pretty entrained to the outside light-dark cycle
so that your perception of time
on shorter time intervals can be precise
because the ability to perceive time accurately
for the given task or given thing that you're involved in
turns out to be one of the most fundamental ways
that predicts how well or poorly you perform
that thing or task.
So we've talked about circadian entrainment,
the matching of the cells and tissues
and organs of our body to the 365-day journey
that the earth takes around the sun each year.
And we talked about circadian entrainment,
the way that the 24-hour genetic and protein clocks
of each and every one of our cells is matched
to the rotation of the earth on its axis
and the exposure or lack of exposure to the sun
because of that rotation on its axis.
Next, I'd like to talk about so-called
ultradian entrainment.
Ultradian rhythms are rhythms of about 90 minutes or so,
and all of our existence is broken up
into these 90-minute ultradian cycles.
When you go to sleep at night,
whether or not you sleep six hours or four hours
or eight hours or 10 hours,
that entire period of sleep is broken up
into these 90-minute ultradian cycles.
Early in the night, you tend to have more slow-wave sleep.
Later in the night, you tend to have more REM sleep,
but nonetheless, your sleep is broken up
into these 90-minute cycles.
However, when you wake up in the morning,
many of the things that you do are governed
by these ultradian rhythms.
For instance, if you were to work,
meaning do math or try and learn a language
or do physical work of any kind or work out,
the 90-minute time block seems to be the one
in which the brain can enter a state of focus and alertness
and do hard work and focus, focus, focus,
and then at about 90 minutes,
there's a significant drop in your ability
to engage in this mental or physical work.
Now, everybody from the self-help literature
to the business literature to the pop psychology literature
has tried to leverage these ultradian cycles
by saying if you're going to do something hard
and you want to focus on it,
limit it to 90 minutes or less,
and I am one of those people
who's also joined that conversation,
and indeed, I use 90-minute work cycles,
and I think they are extremely powerful.
One should never expect that you're going to drop
immediately into a state of high focus at the beginning
and then remain there for 90 minutes.
We all struggle to varying degrees to achieve focus
and motivation and drive within those 90-minute cycles,
but it is true, meaning there is ample literature
to support the idea that after about 90 minutes,
we tend to go into a state of less ability to focus.
So while this isn't time perception per se,
it is, again, an example of entrainment.
What are we in training to, right?
Just because we can focus for 90 minutes
and then not so well at 100 minutes or 120 minutes,
what are we in training to?
Well, what you're in training to
is the release of particular neurochemicals,
in this case, acetylcholine and dopamine,
that allow your brain to focus
for particular periods of time, 90 minutes or so,
and after about 90 minutes or so,
the amount of those chemicals that can be released
tends to drop very low,
which is why your ability to focus becomes diminished.
If one would like to explore more about the kind of backbone
and basis of these ultradian rhythms,
it goes by a different name.
This was originally called the basic rest activity cycle.
This was proposed many years ago by Nathaniel Kleitman.
It was established to be true within sleep states,
as I mentioned before.
Then it was debated for a long time
whether or not these 90-minute cycles
also control our ability to focus
and perform work in wakeful states,
and it turns out that they do.
Now there's a lot of literature to support that.
I always get the question,
how do you know when the 90-minute cycle begins?
In other words, let's say you wake up at 8 a.m.
and you just finished a 90-minute sleep cycle.
Does that mean that your next 90-minute cycle
where you could do work begins right at 801?
No.
The interesting thing about these basic rest activity cycles,
these ultradian rhythms,
is that you can initiate them whenever you want.
This is not like a circadian rhythm,
which is a hardwired, unerring signal of 24 hours.
The ultradian rhythms that occur during sleep
are hardwired, unerring.
You don't get the option of making your sleep cycles
at 120 minutes or five minutes.
You don't get that option.
But if you decide that you want to apply
ultradian rhythms to work and performance,
you can set a clock and decide,
okay, now the focus begins, now the work begins,
and this 90-minute cycle is the period
in which I'm going to do work.
And I actually do this.
Mid-morning and sometimes twice a day,
I do a 90-minute cycle where I limit all distraction
as much as possible, put away my phone,
often turn off the internet as well.
I talked about this in an episode
on kind of an optimal work day,
at least for me, just to give an example
of how this might work.
But I want to emphasize again
that these ultradian rhythms are ones that you set.
So you decide I'm going to work for 90 minutes.
What you can't negotiate, however,
is that at about 100 minutes or 120 minutes,
no matter who you are,
you're going to see a diminishment in performance.
You're not going to focus as well.
And that's, again, because of the way
that these 90-minute cycles are linked
to the ability of the neurons
that release acetylcholine and dopamine
and to some extent norepinephrine,
the things that give us narrow focus, motivation, and drive,
the way that these 90-minute cycles
are involved in those circuits.
After about 90 minutes,
those circuits are far less willing to engage,
and therefore it's much harder
to continue to focus to a high degree.
Some people like to do multiple 90-minute cycles
per day of focus.
In that case, you need to separate them out.
You can't do one 90-minute cycle
then go right into another 90-minute cycle
then another 90-minute cycle.
You can't cheat these circuits related to acetylcholine
and dopamine and norepinephrine, unfortunately.
I suggest that people do no more than three,
and ideally it would be two
or just one of these 90-minute cycles.
Why did I say ideally?
Well, they are very taxing.
You are in a very narrow tunnel of focus.
So for me, I can do one mid-morning.
I can probably do another one in the afternoon.
This is not the kind of work that's like checking email
or text messaging or social media.
This is very focused, hard work.
Working on hard problems of various kinds,
and this will be different for everybody.
So I recommend that they be spaced
by at least two to four hours,
and most people probably won't be able to handle
more than two per day.
There are probably some mutants out there
that could do three or four, but that's exceedingly rare.
I think even one a day is going to feel
like a significant mental investment,
and afterwards, you're going to feel pretty taxed.
So now we've talked about circannual,
circadian, and ultradian rhythms,
but we haven't really talked about time perception per se.
We've mainly talked about the subconscious,
slow oscillatory ways in which we are entrained
or matched to the year or to the day,
and these ultradian cycles that we can impose on our work
and that we can leverage toward more focus if we like.
But what about the actual perception of time?
What actually controls how fast
or how slowly we perceive time going by?
There are basically three forms of time perception
that we should all be aware of.
One is our perception of the passage of time in the present,
how quickly or slowly things seem to be happening for us.
This is kind of like an interval timer, ticking off time,
tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.
It's either fine slicing like that or tick, tick, tick.
We have interval timers.
I'll discuss the basis of those interval timers.
We also engage in what's called prospective timing,
which is like a stopwatch, measuring off things
as they go forward.
That might sound a little bit like what I just described,
but it's actually a little bit different.
For instance, if I told you to start measuring off
a two-minute time interval into the future,
you could do that pretty well.
But if I told you you had to measure
a five-minute time interval into the future
and you couldn't use any clocks or watches
or your phone or anything like that,
you would have to set the tick marks.
You would have to decide how many times
you were going to count off
during that five-minute time block.
There's also retrospective time,
which is how you measure off time in the past.
So if I say, you know, last week I know you went
to the park, you did some things with friends,
you know, you went out in the evening.
How long was it between lunch
and when you went to dinner with friends?
You probably then go, okay, well, I remember
I went to dinner at seven and we had lunch right around two.
You're using memory to reconstruct certain sets
of events in the past and get a sense
of their relative positioning within time, okay?
So we have retrospective, current time interval
measurements, and then prospective time measurement
into the future.
The beauty of time perception in the human nervous system
is that it boils down to a couple of simple molecules
that govern whether or not we are fine slicing time
or whether or not we are batching time in larger bins.
Those molecules go by names that maybe you've heard,
things like dopamine and norepinephrine,
neuromodulators, called neuromodulators
because they modulate, they change the way
that other neural circuits work.
Also things like serotonin.
Serotonin is released from a different site in the brain
than dopamine and norepinephrine is
and has a different effect on time perception.
So just to give you an example of how things like dopamine
and serotonin can modulate our perception of time,
I want to focus on a little bit of literature
that now has been done, unfortunately,
in animals and humans, and which essentially shows
that the more dopamine that's released into our brain,
the more we tend to overestimate the amount of time
that has just passed.
Let me repeat that.
The more dopamine that is released into our brain,
the more we tend to overestimate how much time has passed.
These experiments are very straightforward, excuse me,
and they're very objective, which is really nice,
which is you can give people or an animal a drug
that increases the amount of dopamine
and then ask them to measure off
without any measurement device like a watch or a clock
when one minute has passed.
As dopamine levels rise in the brain,
people tend to think that the minute is up before a minute.
So at the 38-second mark, they'll say,
okay, I think a minute is up.
So they've overestimated how much time has passed, okay?
The higher the level of dopamine,
the more people tend to overestimate.
Now, it's also true that norepinephrine,
also called noradrenaline, plays a role,
and its role is very similar to that of dopamine.
And that's because norepinephrine and dopamine
are close cousins.
As some of you may recall,
that they are actually manufactured from one another, okay?
So dopamine can actually make epinephrine and norepinephrine
biochemically.
There's a cascade in which dopamine can be made
into norepinephrine and epinephrine, which is remarkable.
How does having elevated levels of dopamine
and norepinephrine cause one to overestimate
how much time has passed?
Well, it does it because of the way
that it causes fine slicing of your time bins.
So fine slicing of time bins is like increasing
the frame rate on your camera, right?
Slow motion is achieved in movies and elsewhere
by increasing the frame rate.
So if you take a movie at 30 frames per second
and watch it, it will appear to have a certain speed, right?
Because those are just snapshots, 30 frames per second.
In contrast, if you took that same movie
at 4,000 frames per second, you are fine slicing,
and you're going to see every little detail.
And as you play each one of those frames,
it's going to look like it moved slower, okay?
Whatever, so the kind of jump shot in basketball
that's done slowly, any slow motion is the consequence
of higher frame rate.
So dopamine and norepinephrine increase frame rate.
And as a consequence, they tend to lead us
to overestimate the amount of time that's passed.
Conversely, the neuromodulator serotonin causes people
to underestimate the amount of time that's passed.
So they've done these experiments.
They actually have done these experiments using in humans
with drugs that increase serotonin.
They've also done them with cannabis,
which increases serotonin among other things,
including the cannabinoid receptor activation.
And when people have elevated levels of 5-HT
or whether or not they've ingested cannabis,
they tend to underestimate how much time has passed.
You do the equivalent experiment.
You tell people that they have to guess
or tell you when five minutes, for instance, has passed,
just to use five minutes as an example this time.
And generally they will miss the five-minute mark.
They will think, they'll let six minutes pass
and they'll say, okay, it was five minutes,
and they've underestimated how much time has passed.
And that's because serotonin
and some of the related molecules in the brain
tend to lead to slower frame rates, right?
They take the frame rate from, in the example I used before,
from 4,000 frames per second
down to say 20 frames per second.
So this is very interesting.
It's interesting in terms of how pharmacology can be used
to adjust time perception,
but it's also interesting in the context
of that circadian rhythm.
There's some emerging evidence
that throughout the 24-hour cycle,
there are robust changes
in the amount of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin
that are present in the brain and bloodstream and body,
depending on time of day within the circadian cycle.
Now, I'm not talking about during sleep.
During sleep, there are definitely variations
in things like dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin.
I talked about that in the episodes on sleep.
Here, I'm just talking about the role of these molecules
in time perception during wakefulness.
So much of the evidence points to the fact
that in the first half of the day,
approximate first half of the day,
dopamine and norepinephrine are elevated
in the brain, body, and bloodstream
much more than is serotonin.
And that in the second half of the day,
and in particular towards evening and nighttime,
serotonin levels are going up.
I think that's fairly well-established now.
What that means, based on what we just discussed
about the role of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin
in setting the frame rate of time perception,
is that our perception of the passage of time
will be very different in the early part of the day
and in the latter half of the day.
And there's starting to be some evidence to support this,
that early in the day, people tend to overestimate
how much time has passed.
And later in the day, they tend to underestimate
And this is independent of taking any kind of substance
that would increase or decrease dopamine or serotonin.
Now, this is important in terms of how one thinks
about structuring their day,
because I know many people are thinking about
the various tasks that they need to do
throughout their day.
Many, or I should say all of the literature at least
that I can find on productivity and things of that sort
point to the idea that we should be doing the hardest task,
the thing that we want to do the least
or the most important task early in the day
as a kind of a psychological tool for getting it done
and feeling as if we accomplished something.
And I think that's an excellent protocol, frankly.
But I'm not sure it's an excellent protocol
because of the way that we sense accomplishment,
or at least it's not only an excellent protocol
because of the way that we sense accomplishment.
Another reason to move something that's very hard
into the early part of the day
is that if indeed the dopaminergic and noradrenergic circuits
are more active at that time,
we are actually in a better position cognitively
to parse that hard problem
because of the way that we are able to fine slice
our perception of time
and fine slice all the perceptual events outside us.
So what I'm really saying is that early in the day
you are a much more high resolution camera, so to speak,
than you are later in the day.
Now, different types of tasks and different types of things
require different frame rates
or different ways of perceiving time.
And indeed this also lends itself to a tool
whereby for activities that involve
more kind of creative thinking
that aren't as constrained by particular answers or outcomes
and in which we need to kind of blend
different aspects of our memory,
different aspects of task utilization.
In other words, for creative works, for brainstorming,
for things that are a bit more fluid, so to speak,
the more serotonergic second half of the day
and because of the way the serotonergic
second half of the day lends itself to our time perception
may actually be more beneficial for those sorts of tasks.
And I'll put a reference to a couple of the studies
that point to this idea
that in these higher dopaminergic states,
we are better at doing certain sorts of tasks.
And in these more serotonergic states
we're better at doing other sorts of tasks
and how the dopamine tends to be earlier in the day
and the serotonin later in the day, so to speak.
These are broad, I'm painting with broad strokes here,
but I think these lend themselves
to some really excellent tools
because I think we all understand the value
of doing something that's hard or challenging
early in the day,
but we should ask ourselves harder challenging how?
What does that task actually really require
in terms of time perception?
Some people might appreciate some examples
of how this might work.
Basically what I'm saying is
if you are doing work that involves
adhering to some rigid rules,
so math or a recipe or execution of musical scales
or physical skills or accounting
or something that requires a lot of precision
where there's a right and wrong answer and it's hard,
I would suggest that you do that
in the early part of the day
because of the way that dopamine and norepinephrine
impact time perception.
You are literally better at slicing up time.
You are a higher resolution brain during those times
and so that's going to lend itself better
to events and demands that require high resolution.
Whereas in the afternoon,
in this more of what I'm calling serotonergic state,
that's when you're going to be better at brainstorming
and creative works where there's some flexibility
in terms of how you're batching time and perceiving time
and there isn't so much rigid oversight
of a right or wrong answer.
And as an aside to support what I said,
but also to take us back to this critical role
of the circadian rhythm,
there is a lot of evidence
that when one's sleep is disrupted,
when sleep is either too short or is fragmented
or is not of high enough quality for enough days,
one of the first things to happen
is that there is a dysregulation
of these dopaminergic, neurodegeneric
and serotonergic states throughout the day.
They get kind of mish-mashed up.
It's not that they're a total mess,
but they aren't as cleanly defined.
And I think this is one of the reasons
why when we haven't slept well or we haven't slept enough,
we tend to feel a little off, like we can't concentrate.
Part of that lack of concentration is due to other things,
but part of that concentration could be due to the fact
that our sense of the passage of time is disrupted.
So there seems to be some value
in keeping the dopaminergic, neurodegenergic state
kind of limited to the early part of the day
and the serotonergic state, as we're calling it,
going to push towards the second half of the day.
Now, there is a version of how dopamine and norepinephrine
can impact our perception of the passage of time
in ways that can be very disruptive or even maladaptive.
And the best example that I'm aware of is trauma.
Many people who have been in car accidents
or who have experienced some other form of major trauma
do what's called overclocking.
Overclocking is when levels of dopamine and norepinephrine
increase so much during a particular event,
our level of alertness has increased so much
during a given event that we find slice,
in other words, the frame rate is increased so much so
that we perceive things as happening in ultra slow motion.
Now, that might not seem like a bad thing overall,
but the problem with overclocking is the way
in which that information gets stamped down
into the memory system.
So the memory system, which involves areas of the brain,
like the hippocampus, but also the neocortex,
is basically a space-time recorder.
What do I mean by space-time recorder?
Well, your nervous system, of course,
is housed in the darkness of your skull.
It doesn't have a whole lot of information
about the outside world,
except light coming in through the eyes
and whatever happens to hit our ears
in terms of sound waves and skin and so forth.
So it has to take all those neural signals
and it has to create a record of what happened.
Now, it doesn't create a record of everything that happened,
but car accidents and trauma and things of that sort
oftentimes are stamped down
into our record of what happened.
And what gets stamped down,
what we actually mean by the phrase stamped down,
is that the precise firing of the sequence of neurons
that reflected some event,
so let's say I'm in a car accident,
certain neurons are firing
because of the flipping of the car
or there's screams or there's blood
or things of that sort,
all of that neural activity gets repeated in the hippocampus
and then the sequence of the firing of those neurons
is also remembered.
So it's not just that neuron one, two, three, four
fired in that sequence,
it's also that neuron one, two, three, four
fired at a particular rate.
So it would be one, two, three, four during the actual event
and then the memory is stored
as firing of those neurons as one, two, three, four, right?
If during the event it was one, two, three, four
at that rate,
the storage of the memory is not going to be one,
two, three, four, okay?
In other words, there's both a space code as we say,
meaning the particular neurons that fire is important
and there's a rate code,
how quickly those neurons fire or the relative firing,
the timing of the firing of those neurons
is also part of the memory.
This affords our memory system tremendous flexibility.
What it means is that you can take the same set of neurons
in the hippocampus and stamp down many, many more memories
because all you have to do is use a match
of the different rates of the different neurons
that were firing in order to set that code, right?
Otherwise, if you needed a different set of neurons
for every memory, you need an enormous hippocampus,
you need an enormous head.
So I think you get the basic idea.
Overclocking is a case in which the frame rate is so high
that a memory gets stamped down
and people have a very hard time shaking that memory
and the emotions associated with that memory.
And it's not the topic of today's conversation,
but we will cover trauma in a future episode in detail,
but many of the treatments for trauma, EMDR,
nowadays there's a lot of excitement also
about ketamine therapies, exposure therapies,
like cognitive behavioral therapies,
involve not just trying to reduce the amount of emotion
associated with a memory,
but also a deliberate speeding up
or slowing down of that memory.
In other words, trying to allow the person
who experienced the trauma to take control
of the rate of the experience in their memory,
not just whether or not the memory happened at all.
In fact, one of the first things that trauma victims learn
is that they aren't going to forget what happened.
What's eventually going to happen,
ideally with good treatment,
is that the emotional weight of the experience
will eventually be divorced
from the memory of the experience.
And that's done again by trying to reduce the amount
of emotional activation during the recall of that experience
and one of the best ways to do that
is to alter the rate of the memory playback.
In other words, taking that firing of neurons
that might've been one, two, three, four,
again, it would be much more complicated,
but one, two, three, four for the car crash,
and getting the memory to play back at a rate
of one, two, three, four,
or even one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
In other words, allowing the person
or instructing the person to take control
of the rate of the playback.
And in that way, there seems to be
still yet unknown mechanism
by which people can uncouple some of the emotional weight
that's associated with that memory.
So overclocking is a kind of extreme example
of where the dopaminergic and the noradrenergic system
is ramped up so high that people have this,
unfortunately, what seems like indelible mark
in their brain of a particular event.
But again, trauma treatment is designed
to uncouple the emotional load of that event.
Some of you are probably saying, why dopamine during trauma?
I thought dopamine was the feel-good molecule.
Well, in reality, dopamine is not necessarily
a molecule of reward.
It's a molecule of motivation, pursuit, and drive.
And because of the close relationship
between dopamine and norepinephrine,
oftentimes they are co-released.
So whether or not dopamine is released during car crashes
or other forms of trauma, we don't know.
But what we do know is that both the dopamine system
and the noradrenergic system,
when we say noradrenergic, we mean norepinephrine,
those systems are greatly increased
anytime there's a heightened state of arousal.
And arousal can have negative valence,
like a meaning associated with an event that we really hate
that we would prefer not to be involved in,
or it can have positive valence.
But dopamine and norepinephrine
are kind of the common hallmark
of all things of elevated arousal.
And so that's why we see evidence for dopamine
being associated with these changes in time perception,
both for positive events and for negative events.
There's a very interesting relationship
between arousal, dopamine, time perception, and blinking.
And this is all supported by a really interesting paper.
First author Terhune is the last name, T-E-R-H-U-N-E,
is published in Current Biology, Cell Press Journal.
Excellent journal.
The title of the paper is
Time Dilates After Spontaneous Blinking.
So heightened states of arousal
are associated with heightened levels of dopamine.
You now know that dopamine leads
to a kind of fine slicing of time.
And one of the ways that we fine slice time is by blinking.
You know, we think of blinking
as just a thing to like lubricate our eyes
or to limit the amount of light coming into our eyes,
but it's a shutter on our experience.
So much of the information
that coming into the brain through our eyes
impacts our attention.
I've said it before on this podcast
that cognitive attention follows visual attention,
at least for sighted individuals.
Well, it turns out that dopamine and increases in dopamine
are associated with increases in spontaneous blink rate.
So the more aroused we are, the more awake we are.
There are a number of effects,
pupils dilate, heart rate increases, et cetera,
but also blink rate increases.
And every time we blink, this study cleanly shows,
we shift our perception of time,
leading to, as I mentioned before, overestimations of time.
So it seems as though in some way,
blink rate is actually related to frame rate.
And so this is very, very interesting.
And the way that you could think about leveraging this
would be if you wanted to actually slow down
your perception of time, you would blink less.
And if you want to speed up your perception of time,
you would blink more.
Now you'd have to think of a scenario
in which that would be useful to you.
Obviously, if you're going to blink,
you're going to miss things as well.
But I think it's a very interesting parameter
of our visual attention as it relates to time perception,
because what it really speaks to
is that these neuromodulators like dopamine or serotonin
that adjust frame rate,
they're not doing it through some magical mechanism.
In fact, there's no single brain area
that we can say controls time perception.
I haven't said today, oh, you know, it's the striatum.
Well, it involves the striatum,
but I'm not going to say, for instance,
oh, it's the cerebellum.
The cerebellum is definitely involved in timing of movement,
something for a future podcast,
but time perception is what we call a distributed phenomenon.
It's a network of areas in the brain working together,
but dopamine in the way that it relates
to the shuttering of your eyes
seems to be controlling the frame rate on your experience.
Numerous times on this podcast,
I've talked about cold exposure,
and nowadays there's a lot of interest
in things like cold showers, ice baths, submersion
in cold water tanks and, you know,
lakes and oceans and things of that sort.
There are a lot of different positive effects
of cold exposure.
Provided it's done properly,
it can lead to increases in metabolism, brown fat stores,
which are the good fat stores that you want.
They're sort of like a furnace
that allow you to heat yourself up,
stay warm in cold environments to reduce inflammation,
to increase resilience and so forth.
There's a study published in the European Journal
of Physiology showing that cold exposure
can increase our baseline levels of dopamine robustly, 2.5X,
and it's a long lasting increase in dopamine
and appears to be a healthy one,
meaning it doesn't seem to be addictive.
I'm sure there are some people out there addicted to ice baths
but, you know, when you think about the range
of dopamine inducing behaviors that are addictive,
that seems to be more on the health promoting side.
What's interesting is that because cold water exposure
increases dopamine,
it will also change your perception of time.
And if you've ever done one of these cold water exposures,
you've experienced this,
you've experienced getting in and feeling like,
wow, making it three minutes is a really, really long time.
And you are fine slicing time,
your frame rate is going up.
Part of that, just at a kind of a course level
as you're thinking, this is painful, I don't like this,
I want to get out, right?
But part of it is also that your dopamine levels
are going up very quickly,
and therefore your perception of that discomfort
is also being fine sliced.
And so you could leverage a tool, for instance,
where you try and entrain your thinking
to something other than your immediate experience, right?
This is a kind of a controversy, if you will,
in the cold exposure world.
The question is, do you try and lean into the experience
and really feel it?
Or do you try and distract yourself, you know,
sing a song or count off, you know, from one to 100?
Just know that whatever tactic you use
to get through the cold exposure,
that the dopamine level that's now increased in your system
is going to cause you to fine slice
or experience that at slow motion.
So a minute is going to seem like a lot longer
than a minute in reality.
So you could, for instance, decide to pay attention
to some external cue.
Maybe it's a metronome that ticks once every 10 seconds.
You could decide to think about something else.
You could decide to sing a song in your head
or sing a song out loud.
All of that will divorce you
from the sensation that you're experienced somewhat,
but more so it will divorce you
from the perception of your experience
as governed by that dopamine increase in frame rate.
If that isn't clear, just know this.
When you're in the ice bath, your dopamine levels are high.
When your dopamine levels are high,
your experience of the discomfort of that ice bath
is at higher resolution.
Now, up until now, I've been talking about how dopamine
and to some extent serotonin can differentially impact
your perception of how fast or how slowly things
are happening in the moment.
But remember, we have prospective time,
we have our experience of time in the moment,
and we have retrospective time.
And there are beautiful studies that have showed
that the dopaminergic state changes the way,
not just that we experience things now,
but that it changes the way in which we remember things
in the past and the rate at which those things occurred,
and those are in opposite direction.
So to make this very simple,
if something that you experience is fun or varied,
meaning it has a lot of different components in it,
and is, in other words, is associated with an increase
in dopamine in your brain,
you will experience that as going by very fast.
Now, this is different than the ice bath,
which I just said you experience as going by very slowly,
but here I'm talking about something that's fun and varied
that you really like,
and you'll feel like it goes by very, very fast.
Imagine an amazing day for a kid in an amusement park.
They can do a ton of things, it's all new,
they're very excited,
and they'll feel like it goes by very fast.
But later, they will remember that experience
as being very long,
that it was a long day full of many, many events.
And so there's this paradoxical relationship
between how we perceive fun, exciting, varied events
in the present and how we remember them in the past.
For those of you who have gone on vacation,
if you've had an amazing day on vacation,
it'll seem like, or an amazing vacation overall,
it will seem like it goes by very fast.
The last day of vacation, you sort of go,
whoa, it went by so fast because there's so much happening.
But in memory, six to eight months later,
you'll remember, wow, that just went,
that was a long, long thing.
We had this, then we had that, then we did this,
then we had that.
It tends to spool out in a longer memory
than the actual experience.
Conversely, if you are bored with something
or it's something you really don't like,
it's going to seem like it takes a long time
to go through that experience in the moment.
But retroactively, looking back,
it will seem like that moment was very short.
So if the other day I was waiting in the waiting room
for the dentist, it was pretty boring.
I was just kind of sitting there.
There wasn't much going on.
And it did seem like it was going on an awfully long time.
But indeed, looking back, it just seems like,
okay, I sat in that room, not much happened.
And so it seems like a very short time been.
This seems to be an efficiency
of how the brain stores information.
Dopamine being associated, of course,
with fun and varied experiences
and low dopamine being associated with kind of empty,
boring or what at the time seemed like long experiences.
And this whole thing has been stamped down
into the scientific literature by those earlier experiments
where they take human beings
and isolate them in certain environments,
take away all the clocks and watches and cues
and about what time of day it is
and what time of night it is
and allow people to have a life
where they can either read and work and do things
or where they have very little to do.
When people are isolated in very boring environments
and they don't have access to time cues, time dilates.
They tend to assume that time has gone on very, very long.
And so the reason I bring this up is
we aren't just driven by the circadian clocks
and the circannual clocks and these ultradian clocks.
We are driven by these timers
that vary depending on our level of excitement.
And they vary depending on our level of excitement
because of these neuromodulators, dopamine and serotonin.
So the way I like to think about it
is that you have two clocks, two stopwatches.
One is a dopaminergic stopwatch
that fine slices really closely.
It's like counts off milliseconds
and it's grabbing a movie of your experience
at very high resolution.
And then the other hand, you have a stopwatch
that's gathering big time bins,
big ticks along the hand is moving at bigger intervals,
marking off time.
And depending on whether or not you're excited
or whether or not you're bored,
you're using different stopwatches on time
and therefore you're perceiving your experience differently.
One very interesting aspect to the way
that neuromodulators like dopamine and novelty
interact with time perception and memory
is how we perceive our relationship to places and people.
So really interesting literature
showing that the more novel experiences we have in a place,
the more we feel we know that place, obviously,
but the longer we feel we've been there.
So here's the kind of gedanken or thought experiment
that illustrates what's in the literature.
Let's say I were to move to New York City.
I happen to really like New York City.
I've never lived there, but let's say I lived there.
I lived in a given apartment for a year
and I would have a number of different experiences
in this mental experiment.
Let's say I had 100 different exciting and new experiences.
I would, at the end of that year,
feel as if I lived there a certain period of time, one year.
I would actually know I lived there one year.
If, however, I lived in three different places
in New York City and I met three times as many people
and I had three times as many novel experiences,
I would actually feel as if I had been there much longer
than had I only lived in one location.
This is also true for social interactions.
When we move to multiple or several novel environments
with somebody else, we tend to feel as if we know
that person much better and that they know us much better.
Now, of course, we get the opportunity to interact
with those people in different contexts.
And so, indeed, we do get the opportunity to see them,
for instance, at the coffee shop, how they order coffee,
you maybe go to a sports event, how they act there,
maybe how they interact with your family.
You're getting a sense of them in different contexts.
That's certainly playing a role,
but it seems as if the more novelty you experience
with somebody, not only the more familiar they are to you,
but the more time you feel you've spent with them,
even though the total amount of time
can be exactly the same.
And so that's a very interesting aspect
of how our perception of time and these neuromodulators
and novelty can shape the way,
not just that we perceive a given event in our world,
but how we relate to a place or relate to a person.
So we've talked a lot about the different neurochemicals
and how those neurochemicals can influence
our perception of time.
We haven't talked a lot about the neural circuits
and the various areas of the brain that underlie this.
I do want to touch on that
by highlighting a really wonderful study.
This was a study published in Neuron,
also a cell press journal, excellent journal.
The title of the paper is Behavioral, Physiological,
and Neural Signatures of Surprise
During Naturalistic Sports Viewing.
This experiment is really cool.
They did brain imaging on individuals
who are watching basketball games.
These were basketball games that actually took place,
that were recorded.
And the subjects watching these basketball games,
in some cases, not all,
had some interest in who would win or lose.
And in some cases, not all,
the subjects in these studies had some prior knowledge
of which team they thought was better,
which team was likely to win or not likely to win.
The basic findings of the study were that
they could measure surprise
by the release of dopamine in two areas of the brain,
part of what are called, is called, excuse me,
the mesolimbic reward pathway.
So the two areas of the brain that are important here
are the nucleus accumbens and the VTA,
the ventral tegmental area.
These are areas that release dopamine
as kind of a token of reward
anytime something is surprising
or a positive expectation is met, okay?
So if I predict that my team dribbling down court
is going to score on this drive
and they get the ball in the basket,
a little bit of dopamine is released,
these two brain areas light up in the functional imaging,
so-called FMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging
that they used in the study.
What's really interesting about this study
is not just that dopamine was released
anytime that something the subject wanted to see happened,
anytime they wanted to see their team score, they scored,
but also during surprise.
So if they thought, for instance,
and they would hit a button to predict
that their team was going to score on this particular drive
and they didn't, well, then dopamine could also be released
in response to that surprise.
So this speaks again to dopamine
being something that's important,
not just for positive events, but for unexpected events.
Now that's all very interesting
and speaks to the fact that dopamine
is a kind of flexible currency in the brain.
It's doled out, if you will, or released
when something that one hopes will happen happens,
and it's released when there's a surprise,
even if it's kind of a negative surprise,
it's not something that the subject wanted to happen.
But the more interesting thing
is how that relates to time perception.
What they found was,
regardless of what caused the dopamine release,
the frequency of dopamine release
predicted how the subjects parsed the time bins
of the game they were watching.
What do I mean by that?
Well, when you watch a basketball game
or you watch anything, children playing
or talking to your spouse or whatever,
you're batching time.
How are you batching time?
Well, you could batch a meal by the, I don't know,
the appetizer, the main course, and the dessert,
but it turns out that's not what you're doing.
You're batching time
according to the frequency of dopamine pulses,
the frequency of dopamine release.
And that's what they saw in this study.
If they evaluated people's perceptions
of the passage of time,
what they found is that that matched,
not whether or not it was a particular time point
in the game,
not whether or not their team was going down court
or running back up court to play defense,
but the dopamine release served as markers,
which would predict the frame rate
of their perception of the experience.
And if that sounds complicated,
what I mean is how often and when you release dopamine
is actually setting the frame rate
on the entire perception of everything,
not just for positive events or negative events.
So what this means is as you were going through life,
dopamine and the release of dopamine is saying that's over
and now you're in a new phase of your life,
even if it's very short, right?
So if I get up in the morning and I'm like,
oh, I really need a cup of coffee,
as you probably all know,
I wait 90 minutes to 120 minutes before I drink my coffee,
but then I get my coffee
and surely there's a dopamine hit there, I promise you.
I actually am starting to carve up my day
according to dopamine hits.
I am with consciously or subconsciously,
I'm actually carving up my experience
according to when I'm getting dopamine throughout my day.
This governance over our perception of time
that dopamine has points to a very clear,
very actionable and very powerful tool.
And that is a tool that many people have talked about before
which are habits.
People have discussed habits in a variety of contexts,
but in the context of dopamine reward and time perception,
what this means is that placing specific habitual routines
at particular intervals throughout your day
is a very, not just convenient,
but a very good way to incorporate the dopamine system
so that you divide your day into a series
of what I would call functional units.
What would this look like?
It would mean waking up and having one specific habit
that you always engage in that causes a release of dopamine.
You could say, well, great, that'll make me feel good.
And I would agree,
dopamine release generally makes us feel motivated,
but it would have an additional effect
of marking that time of day
as the beginning of a particular time bin.
Then inserting another habit,
perhaps the beginning of, I don't know,
your breakfast or something,
but recognizing that that's a habit
and being fairly habitual.
You don't have to be obsessively precise about the timing,
but that regular sequencing of things
is going to lead not just to dopamine release
as it relates to reward and motivation and feeling good,
but it actually becomes the way
in which we carve up our entire experience of our day.
And this is almost a circular argument.
You could say, well, of course, I do one thing,
then I do the next, then I do the next,
and that's how I perceive my day.
That's my day, it's my list, it's my to-do list, et cetera.
But what I'm saying is that on the basis of this study,
I should mention the first author,
his last name is Antony, it was Antony et al.
It was published in 2020, the study on basketball viewing.
What it points to is that by engaging in specific habits
that we know we can perform well,
we are actually setting the frame rate on our day.
And so I think there will soon come a time
where human beings are not just thinking of,
okay, my morning routine and my afternoon routine,
I think that can be useful, and in fact,
I used or mentioned a structure of that sort
earlier in their episode,
but rather thinking about what's actually going on
at the level of our biology,
which is that dopamine is marking time.
Habits are a very clear way
in which we can invoke dopamine release
and therefore provide time markers.
And what this means is that, for instance,
during your morning, you might insert habit one
and habit two at say, I don't know, 8 a.m. and 10 a.m.,
and in doing that, that marks an epoch,
a little batch of time in your morning routine
that's distinct from the second half of your morning.
In other words, habits serve as flankers or markers
for the passage of your day.
Now, if that seems kind of hyper neurotic
or why would I want to structure my life like that,
I would say that many people would do well
to structure their life like that and to utilize habits,
not just for sake of what you do during the habit,
but because of the fact that the habits serve as a marker
because of the way they can evoke dopamine release.
And in doing that, you're able to segment your day
into a bunch of smaller, if you want them to be smaller,
or larger functional units.
If anyone wants to experiment with this,
the Huberman Lab podcast puts out a newsletter.
It's called the Neural Network Newsletter.
You can sign up for it at hubermanlab.com.
We put it out each month.
You can see the previous newsletters.
They're zero cost.
We have our privacy statement there.
We don't share your email or anything.
And there you'll find the 12 Steps to Improving Sleep
was the first one.
There's another, the second newsletter
was all about neuroplasticity
and using scientific literature
to improve learning and teaching.
And in the next newsletter,
I intend to include a example protocol
of how one could use habits
and the relationship between habits and dopamine,
dopamine and time perception to structure your day
according to performance of particular types of tasks.
Today, we covered a lot about time perception.
We certainly didn't cover everything about time perception,
but we covered things like entrainment,
the role of dopamine, habits, and various routines
that can adjust your sense of time
for sake of particular goals.
If you're interested in learning more about time perception,
I'd like to point you to a really excellent book
called Your Brain is a Time Machine,
the Neuroscience and Physics of Time.
The book was written by Professor Dr. Dean Buonamano,
who's a professor at UCLA
and a world expert in the neuroscience and physics of time.
I do hope to get Dean on the podcast
in the not too distant future.
If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our podcast channel on YouTube.
It's simply Huberman Lab on YouTube.
And there you can also leave us suggestions
for future guests and topics
and questions about the podcast episodes
in the comment section on YouTube.
In addition, please subscribe to our podcast
on Apple and or Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
You can also follow us on Instagram.
On Instagram, I do short neuroscience tutorials
and tools and protocols.
I cover recent papers,
many of which are not included on the podcast.
We also have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
Not so much today, but on many previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements.
And while supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive great benefit from supplements
for sleep, for focus, and so forth.
One issue with supplements, however,
is that what's listed on the bottle of various supplements
isn't always what's included in the bottle.
And the quality of ingredients varies tremendously
across different supplement manufacturers.
For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements have the highest levels
of stringency of any supplement company out there
that we are aware of.
They work with all the major sports teams.
They work with the Mayo Clinic.
And so we're delighted that we partnered with them.
If you'd like to see the supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-N-E dot com slash the letter U slash Huberman
to see the supplements that I take,
and you can get 20% off any of those supplements.
If you enter the Thorne site through that portal,
you can also get 20% off any of the supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you for your time and attention today.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you next time.